General payu docs for Run a Model section (#1107)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/models/run_a_model/payu.md

You can find a [full documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for _payu_ online. This page summarises the _payu_ capabilities that are most commonly required to run an ACCESS model's configuration.

## Prerequisites

- **NCI account**<br>
    Before running an ACCESS model, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

## Payu setup

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated `conda` environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version
    
<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">payu --version</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay="1000">1.1.3</terminal-line>

> </terminal-window>

Reviewer: ~I would place the current latest version (`1.2.0`) but wouldn't worry about keeping it up to date in the future.~

Actualy, thinking it through, I would remove this animation. 
I don't think it really provides help for a simple command like `payu --help`

To run a configuration, execute the following command from within the *control* directory:

    payu run

This will submit a single job to the queue. Refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model to learn how to set the length of the simulation.

!!! tip
    `payu run` will error out if a non-empty `work` directory for your experiment already exists (from a failed attempt or from running `payu setup`).<br>
    You can add the `-f` option to `payu run` to let the model run in all cases and delete any existing data under `work`.

## Run an experiment

An experiment consists of a series of subsequent runs with each run continuing from where the previous one ended.
To conduct an experiment, use the `-n` option to submit a series of runs until the desired length of the experiment is reached:

    payu run -n <number-of-runs>

This will run the configuration `number-of-runs` consecutive times for the configured run length. This way, the *total experiment length* will be `run-length * number-of-runs`. 

For example, to run an experiment for a total of 50 years with a default run length of 5 years, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `10`:

    payu run -n 10

> ## Monitor the experiment

Author: I feel all the info here and the subsection "Stop the run" is valid for any job on Gadi and not just payu. Should this be somewhere else?

Reviewer 2: Probably. But if no such place exists make an issue and move on would be my approach.

    <terminal-line>work path: /scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/access-om2/work</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>archive path: /scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/access-om2/archive</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading input manifest: manifests/input.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading restart manifest: manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading exe manifest: manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up atmosphere</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up ocean</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up ice</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up access-om2</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Checking exe and input manifests</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updating full hashes for 3 files in manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Creating restart manifest</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

This can help to isolate issues such as permissions problems accessing files and directories, missing files or malformed/incorrect paths.

> 

Author: The documentation of ACCESS-OM2 has a [section on Model Live Diagnostics](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/pr-previews/1107/models/run_a_model/run_access-om2/#model-live-diagnostics). That isn't about payu so I haven't included it but it might be worth adding since it helps with the monitoring?

The `config.yaml` file located in the _control_ directory is the _payu_ configuration file, which controls the general model configuration. It contains several parts, some of which it is more likely will need modification, and others which are rarely changed without having a deep understanding of how the model is configured.

To find out more about configuration settings for the `config.yaml` file, refer to [how to configure your experiment with payu](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html).

### Change run length

_Gadi_ imposes a maximum wall time for submitted jobs. This means most experiments need several jobs to simulate the total time required.<br>
As seen previously in [Run an experiment](#run-an-experiment), _payu_ handles this by splitting a simulation in sections and automatically running each section one after the other in separate jobs. As such the total run length is the product of:

- the run length of each individual submission. This is set differently depending on the model, so refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for details. It is important to set this run length so that the simulation finishes within the maximum wall time for the job.

> - the number of automatic resubmissions by _payu_. This is set through the command line option `-n`. It defaults to 1 and there is no limit on this number.

Author: This seems like a straight repeat from the section "Run an experiment". Is it worth repeating? I think it is worth having a section about changing the run length because people would be more likely to find the info here than under a section named "Run an experiment". We could rename "Run an experiment" section to make the title more descriptive or leave the repeat (so that the section about modifying the config also talks about changing the length of the simulation). Not sure what is best

Reviewer 3: I think it doesn't hurt having the repeat of information here, but I also not have any strong thoughts on it. It is worth specifying that the maximum wall time  for the individual job is set by the [`walltime:` entry] in the `config.yaml`?

### Modify PBS resources

If the model has been altered and needs more time or memory to complete, or needs to be submitted under a different NCI project, you will need to modify the following options in the `config.yaml`:

```yaml
# If submitting to a different project to your default, uncomment line below
# and replace PROJECT_CODE with appropriate code. This may require setting shortpath
# project: PROJECT_CODE

# Force payu to always find, and save, files in this scratch project directory
# shortpath: /scratch/PROJECT_CODE

queue: normal
walltime: 3:00:00
mem: 1000GB
jobname: 1deg_jra55_ryf
```

These lines can be edited to change the [PBS directives](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/PBS+Directives+Explained) for the [PBS job][PBS job].

For example, to run under the `ol01` project (COSIMA Working Group), uncomment the line beginning with `# project` by deleting the `#` symbol and replace `PROJECT_CODE` with `ol01`:

```yaml
project: ol01
```

> For model configurations and output to be saved to a `/scratch` storage allocation other than `project` (or your default if `project` is not set) then also set `shortpath` to the desired path. 

Author: Should the `shortpath` path exists before running payu or will payu create it? It is worth specifying here.

Reviewer 3: Yes, payu does create the `shortpath` directory if it doesn't exist

    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.

### Syncing output data to long-term storage

The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>
On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

_Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory git history to another location.<br>
This feature is controlled by the following section in the `config.yaml` file: 
```yaml
# Sync options for automatically copying data from ephemeral scratch space to 
# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set path below and change to true
    restart: True
    path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)
    exclude:
      - '*.nc.*'
      - 'iceh.????-??-??.nc'
```

> To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `path` to a location on `/g/data`, where _payu_ will copy output and restart folders. A sensible `path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/<model>/experiment_name/`.

Author: Should this path exists before running payu or will it be created by payu? Worth specifying here as well.

### Pruning model restarts

By default, restart files are created at the end of each run, allowing subsequent simulations to resume from a previously saved model state. However, restart files can occupy significant disk space, and keeping all of them throughout an entire experiment is often not necessary. 

If disk space is limited, consider using _payu_'s restart files pruning feature, controlled by the `restart_freq` field of the `config.yaml`.
By default, every `restart_freq`, _payu_ removes intermediate restart files, keeping only: 
- the two most recent restarts
- restarts corresponding to the `restart_freq` interval

> For example, a `restart_freq` set to `1YS` would keep the restart files at the end of each model year, whereas `restart_freq` set to `5YS` would keep those at the end of every fifth model year.

Reviewer 3: It keeps the first restart from the start of the 5th year from the last permanently-saved restart. So if there was the following restarts:

```
restart00X: Last date in restart file
restart000: 01/01/2000
restart001: 01/01/2003
restart002: 01/01/2006
restart003: 01/01/2009
restart004: 01/01/2012
restart005: 01/01/2015
```

The saved restarts would be:

```
restart000: 01/01/2000
restart002: 01/01/2006 (first restart >= 01/01/2005)
restart004: 01/01/2012 (first restart >= 01/01/2011)
restart005: 01/01/2015 (keeps immediate restarts < 01/01/2017)
```

- `YS` &rarr; start of the year
- `MS` &rarr; start of the month
- `D` &rarr; day
- `H` &rarr; hour
- `T` &rarr; minute
- `S` &rarr; second

For example, to preserve the ability to restart the model every 50 model-years, set:
```yaml
restart_freq: '50YS'
```

The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently archived restart file has been produced.

For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#model).

### Other configuration options

!!! warning
    The following sections in the `config.yaml` file control configuration options that are rarely modified, and often require a deeper understanding of how the model is structured to be safely changed.

#### Model configuration {: .no-toc }

This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main `model` configuration and the location of all `input` files that are common to all its model components.

```yaml
name: common
model: access-om2
input: /g/data/ik11/inputs/access-om2/input_20201102/common_1deg_jra55
```

> The `name` field is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored.

Author: Is that true of all models that `name` is not used or is it an OM2 thing?

Reviewer 3: I think `name` is used when there are submodel configurations. It's mostly for naming subdirectories in work/archive folders, e.g. "ocean", "ice". For the top-level model, I think 'name' is overwritten with the model name, e.g. `access-om2`.

- `error` gets called if the model does not run correctly and returns an error code.
- `run` gets called after the model successful execution, but prior to model output archive.
- `sync` gets called at the start of the sync pbs job. For more information refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data).
  
For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#postprocessing).

### Edit a model components' configuration

Each of the model components contains additional configuration options that are read in when the model component is running.<br>
These options are typically useful to modify the physics used in the model, the input data, or the model variables saved in the output files.

These configuration options are specified in files located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` `submodels` section (e.g., configuration options for the _ocean_ component are in the `ocean` sub-directory).<br>

> To modify these options please refer to the User Guide of the respective model component.

Reviewer 4: Yeah config docs :)

[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[Run a Model]: /models/run_a_model/index.md

# Run models using payu

## About

[_payu_](https://github.com/payu-org/payu) is a workflow manager tool for running numerical models in supercomputing environments. It is an open-source software, distributed under an Apache 2.0 Licence.

> You can find a [full documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for _payu_ online. This page summarises the _payu_ capabilities that are most commonly required to run an ACCESS model's configuration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This page summarises the _payu_ capabilities that are most commonly required to run an ACCESS model's configuration. There is also [technical documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for how to configure _payu_. 
```

> 

Reviewer 4: Do we need to be explicit on what is covered in this page compared to the pages specific to each model.

Reviewer 4: This is reasonable well covered by the comment added above

> This page is to be used in conjunction with the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for the chosen configuration ...

Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two areas:

- `work` &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates and removes directories and files in this directory upon successful completion of runs. It is left untouched in case of error to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure
- `archive` &rarr; for storing the output following each successful run. The output, log and restart files are automatically transferred from `work` to `archive` upon successful completion of runs.

Within each of the `work` and `archive` directories, _payu_ automatically creates a unique subdirectory for each experiment. Output and restart subfolders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`. Model components are separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

The `archive` and `work` directories for an experiment are most easily accessed through the symbolic links created in the _control_ directory.

!!! warning

>     Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might get deleted if not accessed for several days and the `/scratch` drive is limited in space. For these reasons, all model runs which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data-to-long-term-storage).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might get deleted if not accessed for several days. All experiments which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data-to-long-term-storage).
```

- decide on a name for your experiment, `<experiment-name>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name.
- decide on a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The `control` directory is a git repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same `control` directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<experiment-name>`. For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).

Then, you can get the chosen configuration using `payu clone`.

For example, say you want to do a sensitivity experiment to the diffusivity in ACCESS-OM2 using the configuration `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`. You decide to:

- `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`, from the repository, `https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs`
- `<configurations-directory>`: store the all your ACCESS-OM2 configurations under `~/access-om2/`

> - `<experiment-name>`: name your experiment `diffuse_test1-1deg_jra55_ryf`

Reviewer 4: this should be branch-name I think

[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[Run a Model]: /models/run_a_model

> # Run models using payu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Run models using Payu
```

Author: payu is always lowercase in the text. Why would we put it uppercase on the page title? Or do you want to use Title Case: "Run Models Using Payu"?

Reviewer: Yes, Title Case would make sense in my opinion. 
However, it is currently not consistent across other pages, so feel free to leave this all lower case.

Author: My tomorrow self will decide on what happens here 😄

- [terminology for _payu_-based experiments](#terminology)
- [the setup of _payu_](#prerequisites)
- [running a _payu_-based experiment](#run-the-experiment)
- [monitoring a _payu_-based experiment on _Gadi_](#monitor-the-experiment)
- [modifying a _payu_-based configuration for the most commonly customised aspects](#edit-a-payu-configuration)

!!! info
    This page is to be used in conjunction with the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for the chosen configuration. The Run a Model page will give information specific to that model (for example, additional information on configuration names and locations) as well as information on configuration customisations that are particular to that model.

For in-depth information about _payu_, check its [technical documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). 

## Terminology

Before explaining how _payu_ works for the ACCESS models, it is worth explaining the difference between configurations and experiments as well as the terminology for the data organisation for _payu_'s experiments.

### Configuration versus experiment

> These terms are not interchangeable although they are closely related.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The terms _configuration_ and _experiment_ are not interchangeable although they are closely related.
```

> A configuration defines a specific way to run the model it relates to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *configuration* defines a specific way to run the model it relates to. 
```

A configuration is defined by:

- a given model version and build
- a given set of input files (ancillaries, forcings, restarts)
- a given set of physical and modelling options for each model component used by this model

> Changing any one of these items creates a new configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing any one of these elements creates a new configuration.
```

An experiment is a series of runs of a configuration to cover a longer time period.

### Data organisation and _payu_'s directories designation

!!! info

>     `payu` will create all the directories it needs. They do not need to be created beforehand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    _payu_ will create all the directories it needs. They do not need to be created beforehand.
```

Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two areas:

- `work` &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates and removes directories and files in this directory upon successful completion of runs. It is left untouched in case of error to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure
- `archive` &rarr; for storing the output following each successful run. The output, log and restart files are automatically transferred from `work` to `archive` upon successful completion of runs.

Within each of the `work` and `archive` directories, _payu_ automatically creates a unique subdirectory for each experiment. Output and restart subfolders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`. Model components are separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

The `archive` and `work` directories for an experiment are most easily accessed through the symbolic links created in the _control_ directory.

!!! warning

>     Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might get deleted if not accessed for several days. All experiments which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data-to-long-term-storage).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might be deleted if not accessed for 90 days. All experiments which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the automated `sync` step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data-to-long-term-storage).
```

## Prerequisites

- **NCI account**<br>
    Before running an ACCESS model, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

    !!! warning
        Different model configurations will likely require you to **join additional projects**. Please refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen configuration for the list of additional projects.

> ## Payu setup

Reviewer 2: I am concerned this could be confusing as there is a `payu setup` command.

How about "Accessing payu"?

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated `conda` environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version

## Run an experiment

> 

Reviewer 2: I so wish we had some control experiments we could point to at this point. I think control experiments are what most users would expect to base their climate experiments on, and the fork -> clone workflow is much much much easier to explain and understand.

Author: We should discuss this "control experiments are what most users would expect to base their climate experiments on". I'm not sure it is as true as you think. But not in this PR.

### Get the model configuration

All model configurations are hosted in a git repository on GitHub, and each configuration is stored as a separate branch of that repository.<br>

To get a local copy of a configuration, you need to:

- identify the `<repository>` and `<branch>` name the configuration is stored under on GitHub. See the information on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen model for this step.

> - decide where on Gadi to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under $HOME. This directory must exist before running _payu_.

Reviewer: I might not have fully understood this sentence. 
Based on my understanding, I would rephrase to:
```suggestion
- Create your [_control directory_](#control-directory) on _Gadi_, where all the model configurations will be stored. We suggest creating it in your `$HOME` directory.
```

> - decide on a name for your experiment, `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Choose a name for your experiment. This experiment name will be referred to as `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment.
```

> - decide on a name for your experiment, `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment.

Reviewer 2: Ok. But I think the name of the experiment and the control-directory should be swapped. People seem to get really confused on this point and name their branch the entire experiment name with the control directory name included. 

It should be stressed that the control directory is the "top level" of the experiment "name-space". All experiments/branches will include the control directory name as a common element.

> - decide on a name for your experiment, `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment.

Author: So you are saying in the example, the branch should simply be `test1` while the control directory is `diffuse_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf`? I guess I need to find a better idea than `test1` as an experiment name for this theoretical diffusion research.

> - decide on a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The `control` directory is a git repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same `control` directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<local-branch>`. For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- decide on a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The `control` directory is a git repository. Experiments are branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same `control` directory for several experiments. For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).
```

> - decide on a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The `control` directory is a git repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same `control` directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<local-branch>`. For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Choose a name of your [_control directory_](#control-directory) (automatically created by _payu_). The _control directory_ is a Git repository where experiments are stored as branches, allowing the same _control directory_ to be used for multiple experiments. For this reason, it is recommended always setting the `<experiment-name>`. For more information, refer to [this payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).
```

Then, you can get the chosen configuration using `payu clone`.

For example, say you want to do a sensitivity experiment to the diffusivity in ACCESS-OM2 using the configuration `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`. You decide to:

- `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`, from the repository, `https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs`
- `<configurations-directory>`: store the all your ACCESS-OM2 configurations under `~/access-om2/`
- `<local-branch>`: name your experiment `diffuse_test1-1deg_jra55_ryf`
- `<control-directory>`: store the configurations for this research project under `diffuse_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf`

To get the configuration as chosen, run:
    
    mkdir -p ~/access-om2/
    cd ~/access-om2/
    payu clone -b diffuse_test1-1deg_jra55_ryf -B release-1deg_jra55_ryf https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs diffuse_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf

>     cd diffuse_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    mkdir -p ~/experiments/access-om2/
    cd ~/experiments/access-om2/
    payu clone -b test1 -B release-1deg_jra55_ryf https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs 1deg_jra55_ryf-diffusivity
    cd 1deg_jra55_ryf-diffusivity
```
Just putting in the modified suggested names from above.

    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;control_directory_name&gt;   &lt;$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

To show the status of all your submitted [PBS jobs][PBS job], you can execute the following command:
```
qstat
```

<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">qstat</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=500 class="keep-blanks">Job id                 Name             User              Time Use S Queue</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">---------------------  ---------------- ----------------  -------- - -----</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;job-name&gt;   &lt;\$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;job-name&gt; &lt;\$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;job-name&gt; &lt;\$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

> The default name of your job is the name of the _payu_ _control_ directory.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default name of your job is the name of the _payu_ [_control_ directory](#control-directory).<br>
```

### Stop a run

If you want to manually terminate a run, you can do so by executing:
```
qdel <job-ID>
```
which kills the specified job without waiting for it to complete.

!!! tip
    If you specified you want the job to resubmit itself several times but want to stop after the completion of the current process, you can create a file called `stop_run` in the _control_ directory.<br>
    This will prevent _payu_ from submitting another job.

### Error and output log files

#### PBS output files {: .no-toc }
When the model fails or completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively.

These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>
To move these files to the `archive` directory, use the following commmand:

```
payu sweep
```

#### Model log files {: .no-toc }

While the model is running, the standard output and error streams are saved in the _control_ directory. Refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for the model you are using for the list of logging filenames for your model.<br>

> You can examine the contents of these files to check on the status of a run as it progresses (or after a failed run has completed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the model is running, the standard output and error streams are saved in the _control_ directory. Refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model for its list of logging filenames.<br>
You can examine the contents of these log files to check on the status of a run as it progresses (or after a failed run has completed).
```

The `config.yaml` file located in the _control_ directory is the _payu_ configuration file, which controls the general model configuration. It contains several parts, some of which are more likely to need modification, and others which are rarely changed without having a deep understanding of how the model is configured.

To find out more about configuration settings for the `config.yaml` file, refer to [how to configure your experiment with payu](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html).

### Change run length

Adjusting the duration of the model run is one of the most common change to apply. However, models follow different ways to adapt the duration of the run. Please refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of the model of your choice for information<br> 

### Start the run from a specific restart file {: id='specific-restart'}

To configure the experiment to start from specific restart files, add a [`restart:` entry](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#miscellaneous) to the `config.yaml` file, specifying the path to a folder containing existing restart files.

> Or, to do this automatically when setting up an experiment, add the `-r` flag to the `payu clone` command. 

Reviewer 2: > Or, to do this automatically when setting up an experiment using `payu clone` interactive, give the restart path when prompted `Do you want to specify a custom restart path?`.

### Modify PBS resources

If the model has been altered and needs more time or memory to complete, or needs to be submitted under a different NCI project, you will need to modify the following options in the `config.yaml`:

```yaml
# If submitting to a different project to your default, uncomment line below
# and replace PROJECT_CODE with appropriate code. This may require setting shortpath
# project: PROJECT_CODE

# Force payu to always find, and save, files in this scratch project directory
# shortpath: /scratch/PROJECT_CODE

queue: normal
walltime: 3:00:00
mem: 1000GB
jobname: 1deg_jra55_ryf
```

These lines can be edited to change the [PBS directives](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/PBS+Directives+Explained) for the [PBS job][PBS job].

For example, to run under the `ol01` project (COSIMA Working Group), uncomment the line beginning with `# project` by deleting the `#` symbol and replace `PROJECT_CODE` with `ol01`:

```yaml
project: ol01
```

> For model configurations and output to be saved to a `/scratch` storage allocation other than `project` (or your default if `project` is not set) then also set `shortpath` to the desired path. 

Reviewer 3: Yes short path will need be a full path. E.g. `/scratch/PROJECT_CODE`

    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.

### Syncing output data to long-term storage

The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>
On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

_Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory git history to another location.<br>
This feature is controlled by the following section in the `config.yaml` file: 
```yaml
# Sync options for automatically copying data from ephemeral scratch space to 
# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set path below and change to true
    restart: True
    path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)
    exclude:
      - '*.nc.*'
      - 'iceh.????-??-??.nc'
```

> To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `path` to a location on `/g/data`, where _payu_ will copy output and restart folders. A sensible `path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/<model>/<experiment_name>/`.

Author: I see the `basepath` stuff has been released, but can't find it in the docs: https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/search.html?q=basepath

@aidanheerdegen @Qian-HuiChen I'm not reading the PR to understand what it does...

> To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `path` to a location on `/g/data`, where _payu_ will copy output and restart folders. A sensible `path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/<model>/<experiment_name>/`.

Reviewer 5: Hi Claire, thanks for reaching out! Yeah definitely no need to read the PR because we are here 😃 
Instructions about `base_path` are on [payu ReadTheDoc sync section](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#:~:text=base_path,will%20be%20overwritten.). Please let me know if you need anything else :)

If disk space is limited, consider using _payu_'s restart files pruning feature, controlled by the `restart_freq` field of the `config.yaml`.
By default, every `restart_freq`, _payu_ removes intermediate restart files, keeping only:

- the two most recent restarts
- restarts corresponding to the `restart_freq` interval

For example, a `restart_freq` set to `1YS` would keep the restart files at the end of each model year, whereas `restart_freq` set to `5YS` would keep those at the end of every fifth model year.
This approach helps reduce disk space while maintaining useful restart points across long experiments, especially useful in case of unexpected crashes.

The `restart_freq` field in the `config.yaml` can either be a number (in which case every _nth_ restart file is retained), or one of the following pandas-style datetime frequencies:

- `YS` &rarr; start of the year
- `MS` &rarr; start of the month
- `D` &rarr; day
- `H` &rarr; hour
- `T` &rarr; minute
- `S` &rarr; second

For example, to preserve the ability to restart the model every 50 model-years, set:
```yaml
restart_freq: '50YS'
```

> The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently archived restart file has been produced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently-archived restart file has been produced.
```

    - restart002: 01/01/2006 (first restart date on or after 01/01/2005)  
    - restart004: 01/01/2012 (first restart date on or after 01/01/2011)  
    - restart005: 01/01/2015 (keeps immediate restarts before 01/01/2017)  

For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#model).

### Other configuration options

!!! warning
    The following sections in the `config.yaml` file control configuration options that are rarely modified, and often require a deeper understanding of how the model is structured to be safely changed.

#### Model configuration {: .no-toc }

This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main `model` configuration and the location of all `input` files that are common to all its model components.

```yaml
name: common
model: access-om2
input: /g/data/ik11/inputs/access-om2/input_20201102/common_1deg_jra55
```

The `name` field, for the model section, is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored. The `name` field is used for submodels (see below).

#### Submodels {: .no-toc }

Coupled models deploy multiple submodels, a.k.a. the model components.

> This section of the _payu_ configuration file specifies the submodels, the configuration options required to execute the model correctly and the location of all inputs required for this submodel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section of the _payu_ configuration file specifies the submodels, the configuration options required to execute the model component correctly and the location of all inputs required for this submodel.
```

#### Runlog {: .no-toc }

```yaml
runlog: true
```

> When running a new configuration, _payu_ automatically commits changes with _git_ if `runlog` is set to `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running an experiment,  if `runlog` is set to `true`, _payu_ saves a history of the experiment. It does this using _git_, by automatically committing changes to the control directory repository.
```

!!! warning
    This should not be changed as it is an essential part of the provenance of an experiment.<br>
    _payu_ updates the manifest files for every run, and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the _git_ history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts, and executables used in an experiment.

#### Userscripts {: .no-toc }

```yaml
userscripts:
    error: tools/resub.sh
    run: rm -f resubmit.count
    sync: /g/data/vk83/apps/om2-scripts/concatenate_ice/concat_ice_daily.sh 
```

A dictionary to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission:

- `error` gets called if the model does not run correctly and returns an error code.

> - `run` gets called after the model successful execution, but prior to model output archive.

Reviewer: Is this after each model run or after the whole experiment (e.g., `payu run -n ...` )? 
```suggestion
- `run` gets called after each the entire model experiment completes successfully, but before the model output is archived.
```

Reviewer 3: It's run after the model run command completes e.g. `mpirun ...`. 

Currently there isn't an option to run a script after all of a series of payu runs have completed with `payu run -n ..`.

```yaml
postscript: -v PAYU_CURRENT_OUTPUT_DIR,PROJECT -lstorage=${PBS_NCI_STORAGE} ./scripts/NetCDF-conversion/UM_conversion_job.sh
```

#### Miscellaneous {: .no-toc }

The following configuration settings should never require changing:

```yaml
stacksize: unlimited
qsub_flags: -W umask=027
```

## Edit a model components' configuration

Each of the model components contains additional configuration options that are read in when the model component is running.<br>
These options are typically useful to modify the physics used in the model, the input data, or the model variables saved in the output files.

These configuration options are specified in files located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` `submodels` section (e.g., configuration options for the _ocean_ component are in the `ocean` sub-directory).<br>

> To modify these options please refer to the configurations documentation of the respective model component, found on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model.

Author: References to what?

> To modify these options please refer to the configurations documentation of the respective model component, found on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model.

Author: I have tried something to move the information of the model components to the structure bit. I've left a shorten version at the bottom of the page as well, for people who skip the structure bit.

For in-depth information about _payu_, check its [technical documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). 

## Terminology

Before explaining how _payu_ works for the ACCESS models, it is worth explaining the terminology around configurations and experiments as well as around the data organisation for _payu_'s experiments.

### Configuration versus experiment

These terms are not interchangeable although they are closely related.

A configuration defines a specific way to run the model it relates to. 
A configuration is defined by:

    - a given model version and build
    - a given set of input files (ancillaries, forcings, restarts)
    - a specific set of physical and modelling options for each model component used by this model

Changing any one of these items creates a new configuration

An experiment is a series of runs of a configuration that covers a longer time period.

### Data organisation and _payu_'s directories designation

A representation of the data organisation for _payu_ is given in the following diagram:

> ![payu directory structure](/docs/assets/payu_directory_structure.png){: class="img-contain white-background round-edges with-padding" loading="lazy"}

Reviewer: You should not include the `docs` folder in the link: `/assets/payu_directory_structure.png`

There is also [technical documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for how to configure _payu_. 

## Prerequisites

- **NCI account**<br>
    Before running an ACCESS model, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

## Payu setup

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated `conda` environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version
    
## Get the model configuration

> All model configurations are hosted on GitHub.<br>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All model configurations are hosted on GitHub. There is one configuration repository for each model. Individual branches in this repository represent individual configurations.<br>
```

> The first step is to choose a configuration from those available and identify the branch name for that configuration, following information on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen model.<br>

Author: "and identify the branch name for that configuration": doesn't this mean a configuration is a branch?

> The first step is to choose a configuration from those available and identify the branch name for that configuration, following information on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen model.<br>

Reviewer 4: I suggests a sentence above

Once you have chosen the configuration, you need to:

> - identify the `<repository>` and `<branch>` name the configuration is stored under on GitHub.

Reviewer 4: Are repository and branch defined somewhere ? maybe in the glossary ?

- decide on a directory on Gadi to store your _payu_ configurations, `<configurations-directory>` (this directory must exist before running _payu_)
- decide on a name for your experiment, `<experiment-name>`
- decide on a directory name to store this specific configuration, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_)

Then, you can get the chosen configuration using `payu clone`.

For example, say you want to do a sensitivity experiment to the diffusivity in ACCESS-OM2 using the configuration `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`. You decide to:

> - `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`, from the repository, https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, `release-1deg_jra55_ryf`, from the [ACCESS-OM2 configs](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs) repository, 
```

for consistency with the rest of the hive docs

- `<experiment-name>`: name your experiment `diff_test1-1deg_jra55_ryf`
- `<control-directory>`: store the configuration under `diff_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf`

To get the configuration as chosen, run:
    
    mkdir -p ~/access-om2/
    cd ~/access-om2/
    payu clone -b diff_test1-1deg_jra55_ryf -B release-1deg_jra55_ryf https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs diff_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf
    cd diff_exps-1deg_jra55_ryf

!!! tip
    Anyone using a configuration is advised to clone only a single branch (as shown in the example above) and not the entire repository.

!!! tip
    _payu_ uses branches to differentiate between different experiments in the same local git repository.<br>
    For this reason, it is recommended to always set the cloned branch name, `<experiment_name>` (`diff_test1-1deg_jra55_ryf` in the example above), to something meaningful for the planned experiment.<br>
    For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).

## Directory structure for _payu_-supported model runs

The general layout of a _payu_-supported model run consists of two main directories:

> - The _control_ directory contains the model configuration and serves as the execution directory for running the model. You created the _control_ directory when you cloned the configuration you want to use.

Reviewer 4: whats an execution directory?

Just say its the place the model is run from

- The _laboratory_ directory, where all the model components reside. It is typically `/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/<model_name>` and is created by _payu_. `$PROJECT` and `$USER` are environment variables on _Gadi_ that points to your default project and your username respectively.

> This separates the small text configuration files from the larger binary outputs and inputs. In this way, the _control_ directory can be in the `$HOME` directory (as it is the only filesystem actively backed-up on _Gadi_). The quotas for `$HOME` are low and strict, which limits what can be stored there, so it is not suitable for larger files.

Reviewer 4: The connection between the "model configuration" being the "small text configuration files" and the "model components"/lab directory being the "larger binary outputs and inputs" is not clear

> The _laboratory_ directory is a shared space for a user's _payu_ experiments using the same model. Inside the _laboratory_ directory there are two areas:

Reviewer 4: What does shared mean here ?

The start of this section talks about an individual model configuration in the singular, and now we say the _laboratory_ directory is actually shared across all experiments using this model 

I think i would stick to only talking about one configuration

- `work` &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates and removes directories and files in this directory upon successful completion of runs.
- `archive` &rarr; for storing the output following each successful run.

> Within each of the above directories, _payu_ automatically creates subdirectories uniquely named according to the experiment being run.<br>

Reviewer 4: This sentence feels out of place / unclear.
We should encourage users to use the symlinks in teh control directory rather than understand this level of detail

_Payu_ also creates symbolic links in the _control_ directory pointing to the `archive` and `work` directories.

> This design allows multiple self-resubmitting experiments that share common executables and input data to be run simultaneously.

Reviewer 4: I think its trying to say

"As the _work_ and _archive_ directories are unique to each experiment, this allows multiple experiments to be run simultanesouly"

!!! warning
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might get deleted if not accessed for several days and the `/scratch` drive is limited in space. For these reasons, all model runs which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data).

!!! info
    `payu` will create all the directories it needs. They do not need to be created beforehand.

## Run the configuration

> _payu_ manages the experiment through a [PBS job][PBS job] that it self-submits.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_payu_ manages the experiment through a [PBS job][PBS job] that it submits.
```

    <terminal-line>Loading input manifest: manifests/input.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading restart manifest: manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading exe manifest: manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up atmosphere</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up ocean</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up ice</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up access-om2</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Checking exe and input manifests</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updating full hashes for 3 files in manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Creating restart manifest</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

This can help to isolate issues such as permissions problems accessing files and directories, missing files or malformed/incorrect paths.

## Outputs organisation

At the end of a successful model run, output files, restart files and log files are moved from the `work` directory to the `archive` directory.<br>

> Symbolic links to these directories are also provided in the _control_ directory for convenience.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Symbolic links to these directories are provided in the _control_ directory.
```

If a model run is unsuccessful, the `work` directory is left untouched to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure.

Outputs and restarts are stored in subfolders within the `archive` directory, subdivided for each run of the model.<br>
Output and restart folders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`.

Model components are separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

## Edit a _payu_ configuration

> The modifications discussed in this section can change how the model and its components are configured, or the way the model is run by _payu_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The modifications discussed in this section can change the way the model is run by _payu_.
```

(refer to model specific pages for how to chang eth model )

The `config.yaml` file located in the _control_ directory is the _payu_ configuration file, which controls the general model configuration. It contains several parts, some of which it is more likely will need modification, and others which are rarely changed without having a deep understanding of how the model is configured.

To find out more about configuration settings for the `config.yaml` file, refer to [how to configure your experiment with payu](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html).

### Change run length

One of the most common changes is to adjust the duration of the model run.<br> With _payu_, simulations are split into smaller _run lengths_, each with the duration specified by the `runtime` settings in the `config.yaml` file:

```yml
    runtime:
        years: 1
        months: 0
        days: 0

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think using `runtime:` dictionary in the `config.yaml` is ACCESS-ESM1.5 specific. There's different instructions for setting runtime for ACCESS-OM2 (https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run_a_model/run_access-om2/#change-run-length) and ACCESS-OM3 (https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run_a_model/run_access-om3/#change-run-length-and-restart-period)

At the end of each run length, each model component saves its state into a _restart file_, allowing the simulation to be continued in subsequent runs.

#### Understand _runtime_, _runspersub_, and _-n_ parameters {: id="multiple-runs"}

It is possible to have more than one model run per queue submit. With the correct use of [`runtime`](#runtime), `runspersub`, `-n` and `walltime` parameters, you can have full control of your experiment.<br>

- `runtime` defines the _run length_.
- `runspersub` defines the maximum number of runs for every [PBS job] submission.
- `-n` sets the number of runs to be performed.
- `walltime` defines the maximum time of every [PBS job] submission.

Now some practical examples:

- **Run 20 years of simulation with resubmission every 5 years**<br>

>     To have a _total experiment length_ of 20 years with a 5-year resubmission cycle, leave [`runtime`](#runtime) as the default value of `1 year`, set `runspersub` to `5` and increase `walltime` to allow for 5 years of simulation within a PBS job. Then, run the configuration with `-n` set to `20`:

Reviewer 3: The default value for runtime might be model configuration dependent. E.g. the OM2 `1deg_jra55_ryf` configuration is 5 years, and the higher resolutions are  shorter -e.g. `01deg_jra55_ryf` is 3 months.

    If `restart_freq` is set to `5YS` (5 years), _payu_ will keep:

    - restart000: 01/01/2000  
    - restart002: 01/01/2006 (first restart >= 01/01/2005)  
    - restart004: 01/01/2012 (first restart >= 01/01/2011)  
    - restart005: 01/01/2015 (keeps immediate restarts < 01/01/2017)  

For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#model).

### Other configuration options

!!! warning
    The following sections in the `config.yaml` file control configuration options that are rarely modified, and often require a deeper understanding of how the model is structured to be safely changed.

#### Model configuration {: .no-toc }

This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main `model` configuration and the location of all `input` files that are common to all its model components.

```yaml
name: common
model: access-om2
input: /g/data/ik11/inputs/access-om2/input_20201102/common_1deg_jra55
```

The `name` field, for the model section, is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored. The `name` field is used for submodels (see below).

#### Submodels {: .no-toc }

> Coupled models deploy multiple submodels, a.k.a. the model components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Some coupled models simultanouesly run multiple executables for each submodel, a.k.a. the model components.
```

!!! warning
    This should not be changed as it is an essential part of the provenance of an experiment.<br>
    _payu_ updates the manifest files for every run, and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the _git_ history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts, and executables used in an experiment.

#### Userscripts {: .no-toc }

```yaml
userscripts:
    error: tools/resub.sh
    run: rm -f resubmit.count
    sync: /g/data/vk83/apps/om2-scripts/concatenate_ice/concat_ice_daily.sh 
```

A dictionary to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission:

- `error` gets called if the model does not run correctly and returns an error code.
- `run` gets called after the model successful execution, but prior to model output archive.
- `sync` gets called at the start of the sync pbs job. For more information refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data).
  
For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#postprocessing).

#### Postscripts {: .no-toc }

> Postprocessing scripts that run after _payu_ has completed all steps of each run (for example, with `payu run -n 10`, the postscript will run 10 times). Scripts that might alter the output directory, for example, can be run as postscripts. These run in PBS jobs separate from the main model simulation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Postprocessing script that runs after _payu_ has completed all steps of each run (for example, with `payu run -n 10`, the postscript will run 10 times). Scripts that might alter the output directory, for example, can be run as as a postscript. These run in PBS jobs separate from the main model simulation.
```

[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[Run a Model]: /models/run_a_model

# Run Models Using Payu

## About

> [_payu_](https://github.com/payu-org/payu) is a workflow manager tool for running numerical models in supercomputing environments. It is an open-source software, distributed under an Apache 2.0 Licence.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[_payu_](https://github.com/payu-org/payu) is a workflow manager tool for running numerical models in supercomputing environments. It is an open-source software package, distributed under an Apache 2.0 Licence.
```

This means the _configuration_ definition can be tracked with git, and so is easy to back up and share.  It also optimises the use of different filesystems on high-performance computers. Finally, this layout ensures several _experiments_ that share common executables and input data can be run simultaneously.  

A representation of the data organisation for _payu_ is given in the following diagram:

<!-- Diagram created from Lucid chart: https://lucid.app/users/login#/login -->
<!-- It can be edited by any Lucid's member (free account), at this link: https://lucid.app/lucidchart/ccebf957-8915-4344-a832-426427451c00/edit?viewport_loc=-159%2C129%2C2067%2C1113%2C0_0&invitationId=inv_1c8cccfd-b20e-4b2f-977a-a74b0b8355ae -->

![payu directory structure](/assets/payu_directory_structure.png){: class="example-img" loading="lazy"}

As shown in the diagram, the general layout of a _payu_-supported model run consists of two main directories:

- The _control_ directory contains the model configuration and is the directory from which the model run is started.  

>   {: #control-directory }. This directory contains information to manage the simulation, it also contains the scientific options for each model component that define the physics used in the model component or the diagnostics saved by the model component. These configuration options are specified in files located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` [`submodels` section](#submodels). To modify these options please refer to the configurations documentation of the respective model component, found on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model.

Reviewer 2: Model sub-directories are only required for coupled models with more than one component. Note that for all the currently released models this is true, and I'm not sure it is worth going into now. However the test AM3 payu config did not have sub-models for example. And neither would stand-along CABLE.

Author: So in these cases, where are the namelists etc. located?

Reviewer 4: typically the namelists/config files would be in the model directory, no submodels would be specified in the config.yaml 

([example](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/dev-MC_25km_jra_iaf/config.yaml))

>   {: #control-directory }. This directory contains information to manage the simulation, it also contains the scientific options for each model component that define the physics used in the model component or the diagnostics saved by the model component. These configuration options are specified in files located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` [`submodels` section](#submodels). To modify these options please refer to the configurations documentation of the respective model component, found on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model.

Reviewer 4: <img width="396" height="91" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/17773914-9364-4c77-adce-5e09db073cd0" />

Something doesn't render right

- The _laboratory_ directory contains all data from _payu_ experiments of the same model. By default, it is `/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/<model_name>`. `$PROJECT` and `$USER` are environment variables on _Gadi_ that points to your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) and your username respectively. See the section on [modifying the PBS resources](#modify-pbs-resources) to learn how to change the _laboratory_ location.

> On _Gadi_, it is good practice to put experiment _control_ directories in your `$HOME` directory as this is the only filesystem that is actively backed-up. There is a 10GB limit for home directories, but the _control_ directory only contains text files and symlinks, and so uses relatively little space (<1MB). The _laboratory_ directory is on `/scratch` which is optimised for fast I/O for large data and where there is adequate space available for large model output.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On _Gadi_, it is good practice to put experiment _control_ directories in your `$HOME` directory as this is the only filesystem that is actively backed-up. There is a 10GB limit for home directories, but the _control_ directory only contains text files and symlinks, and so uses relatively little space (<1MB). The _laboratory_ directory is on `/scratch` which is optimised for fast IO for large data and where there is adequate space available for large model output.  
```

I/O splits over lines, maybe IO is better?

    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

    !!! warning
        Different model configurations will likely require you to **join additional projects**. Please refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen configuration for the list of additional projects.

## Payu setup

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated `conda` environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version

## Run an experiment

### Get the model configuration

All model configurations are hosted in a git repository on GitHub, and each configuration is stored as a separate branch of that repository.<br>

To get a local copy of a configuration, you need to:

- identify the `<repository>` and `<branch>` name the configuration is stored under on GitHub. See the information on the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen model for this step.

> - decide where on Gadi to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under $HOME. This directory must exist before running _payu_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- decide where on Gadi to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under `$HOME`. This directory must exist before running _payu_.
```

To conduct an experiment, use the `-n` option to submit a series of runs until the desired length of the experiment is reached:

    payu run -n <number-of-runs>

This will run the configuration `number-of-runs` consecutive times for the configured run length. This way, the *total experiment length* will be `run-length * number-of-runs`. The `run-length`, or length of each individual run, is set in the configuration. The way to set the length of each run is specific to each model, refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page for your chosen model to learn how to modify the length of each run.

For example, to run an experiment for a total of 50 years with a run length of 5 years, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `10`:

    payu run -n 10

## Monitor the experiment

_payu_ provides the `payu status` command for monitoring jobs (see [documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage.html#monitoring-payu-jobs)). This command can return the scheduler job ID, and the stage the payu run is currently at. When the job is complete, it displays the exit statuses from the model and overall payu run, and points to the PBS log files. 

!!! note

>     `payu status` is available in _payu_ versions 1.2.0 and later. This command does not yet support monitoring post-processing jobs from the configuration, e.g. `payu collate` and `payu sync`.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to have some example `payu status` output. If you agree @ccarouge then @Qian-HuiChen could provide something suitable.

Author: That would be great.

Reviewer 2: @Qian-HuiChen can you provide some example `payu status` output? It would be fine to paste in a comment as a code block.

Reviewer 5: Here is an example of `payu status` output for archived jobs:
```shell
========================================
Run: 8
  Job ID:            archive_example.gadi-pbs
  Run ID:            xxxx
  Stage:             archive
  Total Queue Time:  0h 1m 7s
  Model Finish Time: 1950-10-01T00:00:00
  Exit Status:       0 (Success)
  Model Exit Code:   0 (Success)
  Output Log:        /home/189/USER/expt.o100
  Error Log:         /home/189/USER/expt.3100
  Job File:          /scratch/tm70/USER/archive/expt-branch—6dhash/payu_jobs/8/run/archive_example.gadi-pbs.json
========================================
```
For running jobs, the current experiment time is displayed instead of the model finish time.
```shell
========================================
Run: 8
  Job ID:            running_example.gadi-pbs
  Run ID:            xxxx
  Stage:             model-run
  Current Expt Time: 1950-10-01T00:00:00
  Exit Status:       0 (Success)
  Model Exit Code:   0 (Success)
  Output Log:        /home/189/USER/expt.o100
  Error Log:         /home/189/USER/expt.3100
  Job File:          /scratch/tm70/USER/archive/expt-branch—6dhash/payu_jobs/8/run/running_example.gadi-pbs.json
========================================
```
To monitor the current queue time of a queuing job, please use `payu status --update`.

!!! warning
    If changing the project providing the compute resources during an experiment, set the `shortpath` field so that it's the same for all runs of an experiment.
    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.

### Syncing output data to long-term storage

The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>
On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

_Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory git history to another location.<br>
This feature is controlled by the following section in the `config.yaml` file: 
```yaml
# Sync options for automatically copying data from ephemeral scratch space to 
# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set path below and change to true
    restart: True

>     path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   base_path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)
```
We should use `base_path` now. See below and https://github.com/payu-org/payu/issues/724#issuecomment-4293083472 for context

    - restart000: 01/01/2000  
    - restart002: 01/01/2006 (first restart date on or after 01/01/2005)  
    - restart004: 01/01/2012 (first restart date on or after 01/01/2011)  
    - restart005: 01/01/2015 (keeps immediate restarts before 01/01/2017)  

For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#model).

### Other configuration options

!!! warning
    The following sections in the `config.yaml` file control configuration options that are rarely modified, and often require a deeper understanding of how the model is structured to be safely changed.

#### Model configuration {: .no-toc }

This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main `model` configuration and the location of all `input` files that are common to all its model components.

```yaml
name: common
model: access-om2
input: /g/data/ik11/inputs/access-om2/input_20201102/common_1deg_jra55
```

The `name` field, for the model section, is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored. The `name` field is used for submodels (see below).

#### Submodels {: .no-toc }

> Coupled models typically deploy multiple submodels, a.k.a. the model components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Coupled models may deploy the model components as multiple submodels.
```

## Terminology

Before explaining how _payu_ works for the ACCESS models, it is worth explaining the difference between configurations and experiments as well as the terminology for the data organisation for _payu_'s experiments.

### Configuration versus experiment

These terms are not interchangeable although they are closely related.

A configuration defines a specific way to run the model it relates to. 
A configuration is defined by:

- a given model version and build
- a given set of input files (ancillaries, forcings, restarts)
- a given set of physical and modelling options for each model component used by this model

Changing any one of these items creates a new configuration

An experiment is a series of runs of a configuration to cover a longer time period.

### Data organisation and _payu_'s directories designation

!!! info
    `payu` will create all the directories it needs. They do not need to be created beforehand.

A representation of the data organisation for _payu_ is given in the following diagram:

![payu directory structure](/assets/payu_directory_structure.png){: class="example-img" loading="lazy"}

> This design was chosen to separate the small files that define the configuration and the larger binary output and input files needed for a realisation of a configuration. This ensures the configuration definition is easy to back up and share. It also optimises the use of different filesystems on high-performance computers. Finally, this layout ensures several experiments that share common executables and input data to be run simultaneously.

Reviewer 4: I think I would put this paragraph before the diagram
